---
title: "Why Should You Care About Medical Research?"
date: 2025-10-28T20:50:28
summary: "Critical appraisal skills are need of the hour in clinical practice"
---

**Why Should You Care About Medical Research?**

*\"Half of what you\'ll learn in medical school will be shown to be
either dead wrong or out of date within five years of your graduation;
the trouble is that nobody can tell you which half---so the most
important thing to learn is how to learn on your own.\" -- David
Sackett, Father of Evidence-Based Medicine*

**Introduction**

Let me tell you a story about a treatment that was used by doctors for
nearly 3,000 years. It was considered the go-to remedy for almost every
ailment imaginable---from fevers and headaches to pneumonia and heart
disease. Physicians across continents and centuries swore by it. Famous
patients, including George Washington, received it. Medical textbooks
recommended it well into the 20th century.(1)

What was this miracle treatment? **Bloodletting**---the practice of
deliberately draining blood from patients, sometimes removing up to 40%
of their blood volume. And here\'s the kicker: not only did it not work
for most conditions, but it likely killed thousands of people, including
possibly America\'s first president.(2)

Washington fell ill with a throat infection in December 1799. Over eight
hours, his doctors drained about 40% of his blood through repeated
bloodletting sessions. He died that same day. While we can\'t say for
certain that bloodletting killed him, we know it didn\'t help---and
modern analysis suggests it probably hastened his death.

So how did an ineffective and often deadly treatment persist for
millennia? Simple: doctors based their practice on tradition, theory,
and personal observation rather than rigorous evidence. They believed in
the ancient theory of \"humors\"---that disease resulted from imbalances
in body fluids---and bloodletting seemed to make sense within that
framework. Some patients appeared to improve (many would have recovered
anyway), and this confirmation bias kept the practice alive for
centuries.

The bloodletting story isn\'t just a historical curiosity. It\'s a
powerful reminder of why **understanding medical research matters**.
Without solid evidence, even well-intentioned, intelligent doctors can
do more harm than good. This chapter explores why you---whether you\'re
a medical student, practicing clinician, researcher, or simply someone
interested in healthcare---should care deeply about medical research and
learn how to critically evaluate it.

**The Birth of Evidence-Based Medicine**

The realization that medicine needed a better foundation didn\'t happen
overnight. It took visionaries who were willing to question centuries of
tradition.

**Enter Archie Cochrane**

In 1972, a somewhat eccentric Scottish epidemiologist named Archibald
\"Archie\" Cochrane published a small but revolutionary book titled
*Effectiveness and Efficiency: Random Reflections on Health Services*.
His message was simple but shocking: most medical treatments being used
at the time had never been properly tested.(3)

Cochrane had a unique background that shaped his perspective. During
World War II, he was captured and spent years as a prisoner of war.
There, with limited resources and while suffering himself, he conducted
his first clinical trial---testing whether yeast extract could prevent
deficiency diseases in his fellow prisoners. This experience taught him
that compassion for patients demanded rigorous testing of treatments,
not just good intentions.(4)

After the war, Cochrane became obsessed with bias in medical research.
He understood that selective observation could make any treatment look
effective if you weren\'t careful. He championed randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) as the best way to truly know whether a treatment
worked.(5)

One of his most famous studies challenged the rapid expansion of
intensive coronary care units in hospitals during the 1970s. These
expensive units were being built everywhere based on the assumption that
they saved lives. Cochrane conducted a randomized trial comparing home
care versus hospital care for heart attack patients. The results were
surprising: home care was at least as effective, and possibly even
superior.

You can imagine how popular this made him with his colleagues who had
just invested heavily in coronary care units. But Cochrane\'s point
wasn\'t to embarrass anyone---it was to demonstrate that assumptions, no
matter how reasonable, need to be tested.(5)

Cochrane\'s work laid the foundation for what we now call
**evidence-based medicine**. In 1992, the Cochrane Centre was
established in Oxford to carry out systematic reviews of randomized
controlled trials. By 1993, this had evolved into the Cochrane
Collaboration, an international network of researchers dedicated to
synthesizing the best available evidence. Today, this remains one of the
most respected sources of medical evidence worldwide.

**The Modern Era**

In 1991, Gordon Guyatt and his team at McMaster University officially
coined the term \"evidence-based medicine\" to describe an approach that
shifted clinical decision-making away from \"intuition, unsystematic
clinical experience, and pathophysiologic rationale\" toward scientific,
clinically relevant research.

David Sackett, another Canadian pioneer, emphasized that evidence-based
medicine isn\'t just about research evidence---it\'s about integrating
the best available evidence with clinical expertise and the unique
values and circumstances of individual patients. This three-legged stool
remains the foundation of evidence-based practice today.

**When Medicine Gets It Wrong: Cautionary Tales**

History is replete with examples of medical practices that seemed
reasonable at the time but turned out to be harmful. Understanding these
stories helps us appreciate why critical appraisal of research matters.

**The Thalidomide Tragedy**

In the late 1950s and early 1960s, thalidomide was marketed as a safe
sedative and treatment for morning sickness in pregnant women. It had
been tested and seemed effective. Doctors prescribed it widely, and
pharmaceutical companies marketed it aggressively.(6)

Then disaster struck. Children whose mothers had taken thalidomide
during pregnancy began being born with severe birth defects---missing or
severely malformed limbs, defective organs, eye and ear abnormalities,
and congenital heart disease. Estimates suggest the drug caused at least
10,000 cases of severe congenital abnormalities worldwide, with many
children dying within months of birth.(7)

What went wrong? The drug hadn\'t been properly tested for safety during
pregnancy. Animal testing was inadequate, and the teratogenic effects
(ability to cause birth defects) only occurred during a narrow window of
fetal development---a fact that delayed recognition of the problem.

The thalidomide disaster transformed drug regulation worldwide. It led
to requirements that:

- Drugs must be tested for teratogenic effects

- Safety and effectiveness must be proven before human testing

- Informed consent became mandatory

- Post-market surveillance systems (like the Yellow Card Scheme in the
  UK) were established

The tragedy demonstrated that good intentions and theoretical
plausibility aren\'t enough. Rigorous testing and careful evaluation of
evidence can save lives---and prevent devastating harm.

**The Hormone Replacement Therapy Reversal**

For decades, hormone replacement therapy (HRT) was prescribed to
millions of postmenopausal women, not just to relieve menopausal
symptoms but also to prevent heart disease, osteoporosis, and other
age-related conditions. The biological rationale made sense: estrogen
levels drop after menopause, and replacing them should be protective.
Observational studies supported this theory, showing that women taking
HRT had lower rates of heart disease.

Then came the Women\'s Health Initiative (WHI) trials in 2002---large,
rigorous, randomized controlled trials testing HRT in healthy
postmenopausal women. The results shocked the medical community: not
only did HRT not prevent heart disease, but it actually **increased**
the risk of breast cancer, stroke, blood clots, and dementia in women
over 65.(8)

The arm of the study testing combined estrogen and progestin was stopped
early in 2002 because the health risks outweighed the benefits.

The impact was immediate and dramatic. HRT use dropped from about 27% of
postmenopausal women in the late 1990s to just 5% by 2020. Initiation of
new HRT prescriptions fell by about 70%, and continuation rates declined
significantly.(9)

The WHI study fundamentally changed clinical practice. Physicians
interviewed afterward described feeling conflicted---recognizing the
study was groundbreaking but also uncertain about how to counsel
patients. Many felt that HRT shouldn\'t be used for prevention, though
it remained appropriate for treating severe menopausal symptoms at the
lowest effective dose for the shortest duration.

What\'s the lesson here? Observational studies and biological
plausibility can be misleading. Women who chose to take HRT in earlier
observational studies were likely different from those who
didn\'t---they were more health-conscious, had better access to
healthcare, and engaged in healthier behaviors. These confounding
factors made HRT look protective when it wasn\'t.(10)

Only rigorous randomized trials could reveal the truth. This example
shows why understanding study design and critically appraising evidence
matters---it quite literally can be the difference between helping and
harming millions of patients.

**The Problem of Practice Variation**

Even today, with access to more research than ever before, medical
practice varies dramatically from place to place in ways that can\'t be
explained by differences in patient populations or preferences.

**The Variation Puzzle**

Research has documented substantial variation in how doctors practice
medicine---the rates of surgery, diagnostic testing, medication
prescribing, and other interventions can differ dramatically between
hospitals in the same city or even between doctors in the same
practice.(11)

Some of this variation is appropriate. Patients are individuals with
different needs, preferences, and circumstances. But much of the
variation appears to be **unwarranted**---it doesn\'t improve outcomes,
it increases costs, and it may actually harm patients.(12)

What causes unwarranted variation(13)?

- **Gaps in clinician knowledge**: Not all doctors stay current with the
  latest evidence

- **Professional uncertainty**: When multiple treatment options exist
  and evidence is unclear, practice patterns diverge

- **Economic incentives**: Payment systems sometimes reward doing more
  rather than doing what\'s right

- **Fear of lawsuits**: Defensive medicine leads to unnecessary testing

- **Cultural and local norms**: Doctors tend to practice like their
  colleagues, perpetuating local patterns

- **Personal preference and autonomy**: Some physicians value their
  individual judgment over standardized protocols

**The Cost of Getting It Wrong**

Unnecessary and inappropriate medical care isn\'t just wasteful---it
actively harms patients.

**Overuse and Overtreatment**

The consequences include(14):

- **Hospital-induced anemia** from excessive blood draws

- **False positive results** leading to cascades of additional
  unnecessary testing

- **Patient discomfort and anxiety**

- **Increased healthcare costs**

- **Complications from unnecessary procedures**

- **Exposure to radiation from unnecessary imaging**

Common examples of overused tests and procedures include:

- CT scans in patients with minor respiratory symptoms

- Carotid ultrasounds in low-risk patients

- Aggressive management of low-risk prostate cancer

- Surgery for degenerative meniscal tears

- Overprescription of antibiotics(15)

Why does this happen? Multiple factors drive overuse: the medical
culture that \"something is better than nothing,\" fear of missing
diagnoses during training, lack of cost transparency, convenience of
electronic ordering systems, and patient expectations.

But here\'s the crucial point: understanding medical research and
knowing how to critically appraise evidence gives you the tools to
distinguish necessary care from unnecessary procedures. It helps you
answer the question: \"What does the evidence actually say about whether
this test or treatment helps patients?\"

**When Medicine Gets It Right: The Power of Evidence**

Now for the good news. When medicine is based on solid evidence, the
results can be miraculous.

**Vaccines: One of Humanity\'s Greatest Achievements**

A major study published in *The Lancet* in 2024 found that global
immunization efforts have saved an estimated **154 million lives** over
the past 50 years---equivalent to 6 lives saved every minute of every
year(16,17).

Consider few more examples:

- Thanks to vaccines, smallpox---which killed hundreds of millions of
  people throughout history---has been completely eradicated

- Polio is on the brink of eradication; more than 20 million people who
  would have been paralyzed are walking today

- Measles vaccination alone accounts for 60% of the lives saved through
  immunization

- For each life saved through immunization, an average of 66 years of
  full health were gained

Vaccines also play a crucial role in combating antimicrobial resistance.
By preventing infections in the first place, vaccines reduce antibiotic
use. Studies show that universal pneumococcal vaccine coverage could
avoid 11.4 million days of antibiotic use per year in children under 5.
Vaccination against *Streptococcus pneumoniae* reduced cases caused by
multidrug-resistant strains by 84% in U.S. children under 2.(18)

Recent analysis suggests that vaccines against 24 bacterial pathogens
could reduce antibiotic use by 2.5 billion doses annually, supporting
global efforts to address antimicrobial resistance.(19)

**Antibiotics: When Used Wisely**

The discovery of antibiotics stands as one of the most critical advances
in medical history. Alexander Fleming\'s 1928 observation of mold
inhibiting bacterial growth, and the subsequent isolation of penicillin
in 1940, transformed medicine.(20)

During World War II, antibiotics saved an estimated 200,000 soldiers
from deaths due to infected wounds. Without antibiotics, modern medical
procedures like open-heart surgery, organ transplants, and chemotherapy
would be impossible.(21)

However, the overuse and misuse of antibiotics has led to the emergence
of antimicrobial resistance---one of the top global public health
threats, associated with nearly 5 million deaths annually. This
reinforces why evidence-based prescribing matters: we need research to
tell us when antibiotics are necessary and when they\'re not.(22)

**Patient Safety Improvements**

Evidence-based patient safety interventions have dramatically improved
healthcare outcomes. Systematic reviews have shown that various
interventions significantly reduce harm:

- **Medication reconciliation** reduces medication errors

- **Surgical safety checklists** decrease surgical complications

- **Hand hygiene programs** reduce healthcare-associated infections

- **Computerized physician order entry** prevents adverse drug events

- **Barcode technology** eliminates wrong-patient errors

- **Fall prevention measures** reduce injuries(23)

All of these interventions are based on rigorous research demonstrating
their effectiveness. They work because they\'re grounded in evidence,
not just good intentions.

**Clinical Practice Guidelines That Work**

When clinical practice guidelines are based on solid evidence and
implemented effectively, they improve both the process of care and
patient outcomes. Systematic reviews have found that strategies like
audit and feedback, educational outreach visits, and reminder systems
can successfully change physician behavior and improve care quality.(24)

For example, guidelines for managing chronic diseases, when combined
with effective implementation strategies, lead to better control of
conditions like diabetes and hypertension, reducing complications and
improving quality of life.(25)

**Why You Need Critical Appraisal Skills**

Given all of this---the historical mistakes, the current practice
variation, the potential for harm, and the proven benefits of
evidence-based care---why do **you** specifically need to develop
critical appraisal skills?

**1. The Information Explosion**

We\'re drowning in medical literature. Thousands of studies are
published every day. PubMed alone indexes over 36 million citations. No
human can keep up with all of this information.

But quantity doesn\'t equal quality. Many published studies are poorly
designed, biased, or simply wrong. Critical appraisal skills help you
separate the wheat from the chaff---to identify which studies are worth
your attention and which should be ignored.

**2. Not All Published Studies Are True**

Publication bias means that studies with positive results are more
likely to be published than those with negative results. Industry
funding can influence research outcomes. Poor methodology can lead to
false conclusions. Even peer review isn\'t foolproof.(26)

Critical appraisal gives you the tools to look beneath the surface---to
evaluate whether a study\'s conclusions are actually supported by its
methods and data.

**3. Your Patients Deserve the Best**

Every clinical decision you make affects a real person\'s life.
Prescribing an ineffective treatment wastes their time and money at
best, and causes serious harm at worst. Ordering unnecessary tests
exposes patients to discomfort, anxiety, false positives, and potential
complications.

Your patients trust you to make decisions based on the best available
evidence. Critical appraisal skills help you honor that trust.

**4. Medicine Changes Rapidly**

As David Sackett noted in this chapter\'s opening quote, much of what we
know today will be outdated within years. New evidence emerges
constantly. Treatments once considered standard become obsolete. Drugs
once thought safe turn out to be harmful.

The most important skill isn\'t memorizing current knowledge---it\'s
learning how to continuously evaluate new evidence throughout your
career. Critical appraisal is a lifelong skill that keeps you current
and keeps your patients safe.

**5. You\'ll Face Conflicting Evidence**

Often, different studies on the same question reach different
conclusions. One trial says a drug works; another says it doesn\'t. How
do you make sense of contradictory evidence? Critical appraisal helps
you evaluate the quality and applicability of each study, understand why
results might differ, and make informed decisions despite uncertainty.

**6. It Makes You a Better Educator and Colleague**

Whether you\'re teaching students, discussing cases with colleagues, or
explaining treatment options to patients, the ability to evaluate and
communicate evidence clearly is invaluable. Critical appraisal skills
help you explain not just **what** the evidence shows, but **why** we
should trust it---or why we should be skeptical.

**7. Healthcare Resources Are Limited**

Money spent on ineffective treatments, unnecessary tests, or unproven
interventions is money not available for interventions that actually
work. In a world of limited healthcare resources, we have an ethical
obligation to spend wisely---and that requires knowing what the evidence
actually shows.

**The Journey Ahead**

Learning to critically appraise medical literature isn\'t about becoming
cynical or distrusting all research. It\'s about developing **informed
skepticism**---the ability to evaluate evidence thoughtfully and make
wise clinical decisions.

Throughout this book, we\'ll build these skills step by step. We\'ll
learn:

- How to formulate answerable clinical questions

- Where to find reliable evidence

- How to understand different study designs and their strengths and
  weaknesses

- How to spot bias and confounding

- How to interpret statistics without fear

- How to determine if research findings apply to your patients

- How to integrate evidence with clinical expertise and patient values

The goal isn\'t to make you a statistician or researcher (though you
might become one!). The goal is to make you a better clinician---someone
who can navigate the sea of medical literature with confidence,
distinguish good evidence from poor evidence, and ultimately provide
better care to the patients who trust you with their health.

The story of medicine is, in many ways, the story of learning from our
mistakes. From bloodletting to thalidomide to hormone replacement
therapy, we\'ve learned that good intentions aren\'t enough. Biological
plausibility isn\'t enough. Even expert opinion isn\'t enough.

What we need---what our patients deserve---is a systematic, rigorous
approach to evaluating what works, what doesn\'t, and what might cause
harm. That\'s what evidence-based medicine offers. And critical
appraisal is the skill that makes it possible.

So yes, you should care about medical research. Your patients\' lives
may depend on it.

1\. Healthline \[Internet\]. 2021 \[cited 2025 Oct 26\]. Bloodletting
Through History: What Was it Supposed to Treat? Available from:
https://www.healthline.com/health/bloodletting

2\. Nicola S. WebMD. \[cited 2025 Oct 26\]. What to Know About the
History of Bloodletting. Available from:
https://www.webmd.com/a-to-z-guides/what-to-know-history-bloodletting

3\. The History of Evidence Based Medicine \| \[Internet\]. 2009 \[cited
2025 Oct 26\]. Available from:
https://nettingtheevidence.org.uk/the-history-of-evidence-based-medicine/

4\. Shah HM, Chung KC. Archie Cochrane and his vision for evidence-based
medicine. Plast Reconstr Surg \[Internet\]. 2009 Sept \[cited 2025 Oct
26\];124(3):982--8. Available from:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2746659/

5\. Mechanic D. Bringing Science To Medicine: The Origins Of
Evidence-Based Practice. Health Affairs \[Internet\]. 1998 Nov \[cited
2025 Oct 26\];17(6):250--1. Available from:
https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.17.6.250

6\. Rehman W, Arfons LM, Lazarus HM. The Rise, Fall and Subsequent
Triumph of Thalidomide: Lessons Learned in Drug Development. Ther Adv
Hematol \[Internet\]. 2011 Oct \[cited 2025 Oct 26\];2(5):291--308.
Available from: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3573415/

7\. Donovan KA, An J, Nowak RP, Yuan JC, Fink EC, Berry BC, et al.
Thalidomide promotes degradation of SALL4, a transcription factor
implicated in Duane Radial Ray syndrome. eLife \[Internet\]. 2018 Aug 1
\[cited 2025 Oct 26\];7:e38430. Available from:
https://elifesciences.org/articles/38430

8\. Crawford SL, Crandall CJ, Derby CA, El Khoudary SR, Waetjen LE,
Fischer M, et al. Menopausal Hormone Therapy Trends Before Versus After
2002: Impact of the Women's Health Initiative Study Results. Menopause
\[Internet\]. 2018 Dec 21 \[cited 2025 Oct 26\];26(6):588--97. Available
from: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6538484/

9\. Iyer TK, Manson JE. Recent Trends in Menopausal Hormone Therapy Use
in the US: Insights, Disparities, and Implications for Practice. JAMA
Health Forum \[Internet\]. 2024 Sept 27 \[cited 2025 Oct
26\];5(9):e243135. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamahealthforum.2024.3135

10\. Bush TM, Bonomi AE, Nekhlyudov L, Ludman EJ, Reed SD, Connelly MT,
et al. How the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) Influenced Physicians'
Practice and Attitudes. J Gen Intern Med \[Internet\]. 2007 Sept \[cited
2025 Oct 26\];22(9):1311--6. Available from:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2219779/

11\. Atsma F, Elwyn G, Westert G. Understanding unwarranted variation in
clinical practice: a focus on network effects, reflective medicine and
learning health systems. Int J Qual Health Care \[Internet\]. 2020 June
\[cited 2025 Oct 26\];32(4):271--4. Available from:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7270826/

12\. Soni SM, Giboney P, Yee HF Jr. Development and Implementation of
Expected Practices to Reduce Inappropriate Variations in Clinical
Practice. JAMA \[Internet\]. 2016 May 24 \[cited 2025 Oct
26\];315(20):2163--4. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.4255

13\. Isaacs D, Fitzgerald D. Seven alternatives to evidence based
medicine. 1999 Dec 18 \[cited 2025 Oct 26\]; Available from:
https://www.bmj.com/content/319/7225/1618

14\. Helping Doctors "Do No Harm" by Addressing Medical Test Overuse \|
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center \[Internet\]. 2018 \[cited 2025
Oct 26\]. Available from:
https://www.mskcc.org/news/helping-doctors-do-no-harm-addressing-medical-test-overuse

15\. Skerrett PJ. Harvard Health. 2012 \[cited 2025 Oct 26\]. Doctor
groups list top overused, misused tests, treatments, and procedures.
Available from:
https://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/doctor-groups-list-top-overused-misused-tests-treatments-and-procedures-201204054570

16\. Global immunization efforts have saved at least 154 million lives
over the past 50 years \[Internet\]. \[cited 2025 Oct 26\]. Available
from:
https://www.who.int/news/item/24-04-2024-global-immunization-efforts-have-saved-at-least-154-million-lives-over-the-past-50-years

17\. Shattock AJ, Johnson HC, Sim SY, Carter A, Lambach P, Hutubessy
RCW, et al. Contribution of vaccination to improved survival and health:
modelling 50 years of the Expanded Programme on Immunization. The Lancet
\[Internet\]. 2024 May 25 \[cited 2025 Oct 26\];403(10441):2307--16.
Available from:
https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(24)00850-X/fulltext

18\. Micoli F, Bagnoli F, Rappuoli R, Serruto D. The role of vaccines in
combatting antimicrobial resistance. Nat Rev Microbiol \[Internet\].
2021 May \[cited 2025 Oct 26\];19(5):287--302. Available from:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41579-020-00506-3

19\. Gabutti G. Available evidence and potential for vaccines for
reduction in antibiotic prescriptions. Hum Vaccin Immunother
\[Internet\]. \[cited 2025 Oct 26\];18(7):2151291. Available from:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9762846/

20\. Palladino L. 5 Life-Saving Treatments We Have Because of Clinical
Trials \[Internet\]. Discovery Clinical Trials. 2024 \[cited 2025 Oct
26\]. Available from:
https://discoverytrials.com/5-life-saving-treatments-we-have-because-of-clinical-trials/

21\. Malcolm L. The Top 10 Medical Advances in History \[Internet\].
Osmosis Blog. 2023 \[cited 2025 Oct 26\]. Available from:
https://www.osmosis.org/blog/the-top-10-medical-advances-in-history

22\. Invest more in vaccines to reduce deaths from drug-resistant
superbugs: WHO \| UN News \[Internet\]. 2024 \[cited 2025 Oct 26\].
Available from: https://news.un.org/en/story/2024/10/1155561

23\. Lungu D. Patient Safety: A Systematic Review of the Literature with
Evidence based Measures to Improve Patient Safety in Healthcare
Settings. TIJAR \[Internet\]. 2023 Apr 28 \[cited 2025 Oct
26\];10(2):27--35. Available from:
https://www.texilajournal.com/academic-research/article/2273-patient-safety-a

24\. Panteli D, Legido-Quigley H, Reichebner C, Ollenschläger G, Schäfer
C, Busse R. Clinical Practice Guidelines as a quality strategy. In:
Improving healthcare quality in Europe: Characteristics, effectiveness
and implementation of different strategies \[Internet\] \[Internet\].
European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies; 2019 \[cited 2025
Oct 26\]. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK549283/

25\. Bora AM, Piechotta V, Kreuzberger N, Monsef I, Wender A, Follmann
M, et al. The effectiveness of clinical guideline implementation
strategies in oncology---a systematic review. BMC Health Serv Res
\[Internet\]. 2023 Apr 6 \[cited 2025 Oct 26\];23:347. Available from:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10080872/

26\. Smith R. Peer review: a flawed process at the heart of science and
journals. J R Soc Med \[Internet\]. 2006 Apr \[cited 2025 Oct
26\];99(4):178--82. Available from:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1420798/

**Summary**

**Key Points to Remember:**

- **Medicine has a long history of well-intentioned but harmful
  practices** like bloodletting, which persisted for millennia because
  doctors relied on tradition and theory rather than rigorous evidence.

- **Archie Cochrane pioneered evidence-based medicine** in the 1970s by
  challenging doctors to test their assumptions and demanding that
  medical practices be supported by randomized controlled trials.

- **Evidence-based medicine integrates three components**: best
  available research evidence, clinical expertise, and patient values
  and preferences---not research evidence alone.

- **The thalidomide tragedy demonstrated the devastating consequences**
  of inadequate drug testing, leading to birth defects in at least
  10,000 children and transforming drug regulation worldwide.

- **The Women\'s Health Initiative study reversed decades of practice**
  by showing that hormone replacement therapy, long thought to prevent
  heart disease, actually increased risks of breast cancer, stroke, and
  blood clots.

- **Unwarranted practice variation is widespread**, with doctors
  reporting that about 21% of medical care, 22% of medications, and 25%
  of tests are unnecessary---driven by gaps in knowledge, fear of
  lawsuits, economic incentives, and local culture.

- **Overuse and overtreatment actively harm patients** through
  complications, false positive results, unnecessary procedures, patient
  anxiety, and wasted resources.

- **Evidence-based practices save lives on a massive scale**:
  vaccination has saved 154 million lives over 50 years, antibiotics
  transformed infectious disease treatment, and evidence-based patient
  safety interventions significantly reduce medical errors and
  complications.

- **Critical appraisal skills are essential** because the medical
  literature is vast and variable in quality, publication bias exists,
  patients deserve the best care, medical knowledge changes rapidly, and
  healthcare resources are limited.

- **The goal of critical appraisal isn\'t cynicism but informed
  skepticism**---the ability to distinguish good evidence from poor
  evidence and make wise clinical decisions that integrate research with
  expertise and patient values.

- **Not all published research is trustworthy**: studies can be poorly
  designed, biased by industry funding, influenced by publication bias,
  or simply wrong despite peer review.

- **Learning critical appraisal is a lifelong skill** that enables
  clinicians to stay current, evaluate conflicting evidence, educate
  colleagues and patients, and continuously improve the quality of care
  they provide.

**Multiple Choice Questions**

**Question 1:** George Washington likely died in 1799 after his
physicians performed repeated bloodletting, removing about 40% of his
blood volume over eight hours. Bloodletting persisted as a medical
treatment for nearly 3,000 years despite being ineffective for most
conditions. What is the primary lesson from this historical example?

A. Ancient physicians were less intelligent than modern doctors\
B. All traditional medical practices should be completely abandoned\
C. Medical practices based on tradition and theory rather than rigorous
evidence can be harmful\
D. Bloodletting was effective for treating infections but not other
conditions\
E. Modern medicine has eliminated all ineffective treatments

**Correct Answer: C**

**Explanation:** The bloodletting story illustrates that even
well-intentioned, intelligent physicians can perpetuate harmful
practices for centuries when decisions are based on tradition, theory,
and selective observation rather than rigorous evidence. The ancient
theory of humors seemed logical, and some patients appeared to improve
(often those who would have recovered anyway), creating confirmation
bias. Options A and B are too extreme and dismissive. Option D is
incorrect---bloodletting wasn\'t effective for infections or other
conditions. Option E is unrealistic; medicine continues to evolve, and
we likely still use some practices that future research will show to be
ineffective or harmful.

**Question 2:** In 1972, Archie Cochrane conducted a randomized trial
comparing hospital intensive coronary care units versus home care for
heart attack patients. He found that home care was at least as
effective, and possibly superior, to hospital care. At the time,
expensive intensive coronary care units were rapidly expanding based on
the assumption they saved lives. What does this study best illustrate?

A. Hospital care is always inferior to home care\
B. Reasonable assumptions need to be tested with rigorous evidence
before widespread implementation\
C. Coronary care units should never have been developed\
D. Randomized trials always show that newer treatments are worse than
older ones\
E. Cost should be the primary consideration in healthcare decisions

**Correct Answer: B**

**Explanation:** Cochrane\'s study demonstrated that even reasonable,
seemingly logical assumptions---like the idea that intensive monitoring
in hospitals would improve outcomes for heart attack patients---need to
be rigorously tested before being widely adopted. The assumption made
biological sense, but actual testing revealed it might not be true.
Option A overgeneralizes the finding to all conditions. Option C goes
too far---coronary care units may be beneficial for certain patients or
when other interventions are available. Option D is incorrect; the
direction of findings varies by study. Option E misses the main point
about evidence; cost considerations come after determining
effectiveness.

**Question 3:** The Women\'s Health Initiative (WHI) trials in 2002
showed that hormone replacement therapy (HRT) increased the risk of
breast cancer, stroke, and blood clots in healthy postmenopausal women,
contradicting decades of observational studies that suggested HRT
prevented heart disease. Why did the earlier observational studies reach
different conclusions?

A. The earlier studies were all fraudulent\
B. Confounding factors: women who chose to take HRT were likely
healthier and more health-conscious than those who didn\'t\
C. The WHI trial was poorly designed and the results were incorrect\
D. Hormone formulations changed between the earlier studies and the WHI
trial\
E. Sample sizes in the observational studies were too large

**Correct Answer: B**

**Explanation:** The observational studies were misleading because of
confounding---women who chose to take HRT were systematically different
from those who didn\'t. They had better access to healthcare, were more
health-conscious, and engaged in healthier behaviors. These differences,
not the HRT itself, likely explained the apparent protective effect.
Only randomized trials, which balance these factors between groups,
could reveal the truth. Option A is too extreme; the studies weren\'t
fraudulent, just subject to inherent limitations of observational
designs. Option C is incorrect---the WHI was a rigorous, well-designed
RCT. Option D, while formulations may vary, doesn\'t explain the
systematic difference in findings. Option E doesn\'t make sense; larger
sample sizes generally improve study quality.

**Question 4:** A recent study found that doctors report approximately
25% of medical tests they order are unnecessary. Which of the following
is NOT a primary driver of medical overuse?

A. Medical culture that \"something is better than nothing\"\
B. Fear of missing diagnoses learned during training\
C. Patients always refusing recommended tests\
D. Convenience of electronic ordering systems\
E. Lack of cost transparency in healthcare

**Correct Answer: C**

**Explanation:** Patients refusing tests would actually reduce overuse,
not contribute to it. The question asks what is NOT a driver of overuse.
The other options all contribute to overuse: the medical culture
emphasizing thoroughness over restraint, training that punishes missing
diagnoses more than over-testing, electronic systems that make ordering
multiple tests easy, and lack of cost information that prevents
cost-conscious decision-making. In fact, sometimes patient expectations
contribute to overuse (option not listed), but patient refusal would
have the opposite effect.

**Question 5:** Global immunization efforts have saved an estimated 154
million lives over the past 50 years, with the measles vaccine
accounting for 60% of lives saved. Beyond directly preventing disease,
vaccines also combat antimicrobial resistance (AMR). How do vaccines
help reduce AMR?

A. Vaccines contain antibiotics that kill resistant bacteria\
B. By preventing infections, vaccines reduce antibiotic use and the
selection pressure for resistance\
C. Vaccines strengthen the immune system against all types of
infections\
D. Vaccinated individuals develop natural antibodies that work better
than antibiotics\
E. Vaccines eliminate the need for all future medical treatments

**Correct Answer: B**

**Explanation:** Vaccines combat antimicrobial resistance primarily by
preventing infections in the first place, which reduces the need for
antibiotic treatment. Less antibiotic use means less selection pressure
for resistant bacterial strains to emerge and spread. For example,
pneumococcal vaccination reduced cases caused by multidrug-resistant
*Streptococcus pneumoniae* by 84% in U.S. children. Studies estimate
that vaccines could reduce antibiotic use by 2.5 billion doses annually.
Option A is incorrect---vaccines don\'t contain antibiotics. Option C
overstates vaccine effects; they\'re specific to targeted pathogens.
Option D misunderstands the mechanism; vaccines work preventatively, not
as antibiotic alternatives during active infection. Option E is far too
extreme.
